In November 2024, voters in California will make 
a critical decision regarding the Costa-Hawkins 
Rental Housing Act, a state law that provides 
safeguards against extreme forms of rent control  
in the Golden State.
Enacted in 1995, Costa-Hawkins provides exemptions from  
rent control for specific properties, like single-family homes  
and apartments built after February 1995. In cities with a  
rent control ordinance that existed prior to Costa-Hawkins,  
it prohibits rent control on any apartments built after the date  
of the original local rent control law. Additionally, it safeguards 
vacancy decontrol, allowing landlords to adjust rents to market 
rates after a tenant vacates.
Prop 33 seeks to repeal Costa-Hawkins entirely, allowing for 
strict rent control on all types of housing, including single-
family homes and all apartments in California, no matter the 
age of the building. 
Prop 33 is funded by Michael Weinstein, the controversial 
leader of AHF . This is his third attempt to advance his anti-housing 
agenda; the previous two attempts were defeated due to  
CAA’ s efforts. Furthermore, Weinstein’ s initiative would erode 
our existing statewide rent stability law and hamper the 
construction of affordable housing, exacerbating California’ s 
housing crisis.
The measure provides that:
“The state may not limit the right of any city, county, or city and 
county to maintain, enact or expand residential rent control.”
continuedWhy Prop 33 Is Terrible for All Rental 
Housing Owners in California
WHAT WEINSTEIN’S PROP 33 DOES:
• Repeals existing California housing laws.
• Authorizes permanent price controls on single-family 
homes, condominiums, and apartments.
• Provides local governments with the ability to hinder 
housing development.
DON’T THINK PROP 33 WOULD  
AFFECT YOU? 
Perhaps you’re not worried about Prop 33 because the 
city where you own rental property doesn’t have rent 
control at present. Or perhaps you already are under 
rent control in San Francisco or Los Angeles and think 
things can’t get any worse. Or maybe you own a single-
family rental, or an apartment building constructed just 
three or four years ago and believe your housing will be 
forever exempt under state law. Prop 33 presents 
significant potential changes that could affect all rental 
property owners. 
FIVE REASONS TO BE WORRIED: 
1. Broadening of rent control to include exempt 
properties: Currently exempt properties, such as 
single-family homes and recent construction, could  
fall under rent control if the act passes, significantly 
altering the business expectations for many who 
believed their investments were safeguarded. 
SAY NO TO PROP 33!  
STOP WEINSTEIN’S LATEST ANTI-HOUSING SCHEME 2. Increased drive for rent control in more areas:  
Tenant activists have brought rent control to more 
California cities in recent years. Prop 33’ s passage 
would further motivate them to pursue rent control in 
cities that currently have none. This would lead to new 
rent control measures in areas previously unaffected. 
3. Heightened impact in rent controlled cities with 
vacancy control: In cities with existing rent control, 
the removal of Costa-Hawkins would allow a return to  
vacancy control. This means that rents would be capped  
even when a tenant moves out and a new tenant moves  
in, leaving the owner unable to move rents to market. 
This would dramatically reduce the flexibility to adjust 
rents between tenancies. Imagine never being able to 
bring your rents to market rates. 4. Policy shift and market instability: Prop 33 would 
mark a broader shift toward more stringent housing 
regulations, bringing uncertainty to the rental housing 
market and affecting long-term investment decisions. 
5. Adverse effects on property values and market 
dynamics: Prop 33 would lower property values and 
discourage new housing development, aggravating 
the housing shortage and leading to a stagnant 
rental market. 
Prop 33 presents significant challenges for rental housing owners in California, threatening to 
disrupt market dynamics and exacerbate the housing crisis. It is imperative for stakeholders to 
act now and join the coalition to defeat Prop 33.
Ad paid for by NO on 33, Californians for Responsible Housing: A Bi-Partisan Coalition of Affordable Housing Advocates, 
Taxpayers, Veterans, and Small Businesses, sponsored by California Apartment Association. Ad committee’s top funder:
California Apartment Association
Funding details at www.fppc.ca.govLearn More:
NoOnProp33.com